# Better audio on Linux...An Introduction to a myriad of solutions!  

One of the many benefits of being a Linux user is that we have so much more flexibility in the configuration of our computing experiences versus other Operating Systems. One of those areas of flexibility is the audio subsystem. With the advent of Pipewire, Linux audio has become easier and more user-friendly than ever before. This power is coming in handy as we transition into a streaming-based entertainment model.  

Something that is not so user-friendly about this trend is the widely varying audio levels and quality between the different videos, songs, services, etc. For the HTPC user, this can become a significant issue, greatly affecting one's enjoyment of the multimedia experience. This is where an HTPC can really shine as compared to virtually any other method of viewing and/or listening to those sources of content.  I am, of course, referring to the ability of Linux PC's to run any of a number of real-time audio processing applications in the background, thereby greatly enhancing the overall HTPC experience as well as providing the viewer with much more control over their audio in general.  That is the focus of this text/repo.  The plugins and principles involved can also be applied to other audio applications such as on the creator's-end, where the use of certain plugins and/or features which can greatly improve the podcast/vlog's audio quality!  I'll say a bit more about this later in this text.

In my HTPC environment, an A/V receiver is connected to the PC via an HDMI cable and does the job of amplifying the sound out to the 6 speakers and sending the video to my television/monitor.  I prefer to keep the computer's output volume set @ 100% (where the signal to noise ratio is the highest), and use the A/V receiver's remote to control the actual volume.  

S/N (signal to noise) ratio is a very important number to look at when shopping for audio equipment, and you always want the highest possible number, preferably over 100.  What it represents is a measure of how much unmolested audio signal can pass through a piece of audio gear at full output before incurring a noticeable amount of noise.  For example:  If you have a S/N ratio of, 108 db +/-3 db, then at unity (the 0 db normal maximum output of the unit), you should be able to measure at least 105 db of output signal before also measuring an audible amount of noise, meaning the unit should be perceptually silent when nothing is playing, not sounding like an air leak or a waterfall.  Bear in mind that EVERY piece of analog audio hardware has a S/N ratio and adds noise to any signal that passes through it, so adding that 82 db S/N ratio EQ to the analog audio left and right output of your computer will also add a noticeable amount of noise (which is much more-easily heard at higher volumes) to the signal going into the amplifier that drives the speakers, which itself will also add a bit more noise....and before you know it you develop an insatiable urge to collect seashells every time you turn on your computer...you get the point I hope.  To put it another, simpler way:  Every piece of analog audio gear adds hiss/noise in addition to doing whatever else it is actually supposed to be doing to the sound, and is a big part of the reason traditional analog recording studios were/are very expensive to build (properly).  This adding of noise to the sound does happen with digital audio equipment that converts the audio to analog for processing, then back to digital for output.  Those pieces of gear will also add noise/hiss.  This is where an all-digital signal chain such as using the digital audio output of your PC, be it via HDMI or a digital-optical/TOSLink cable, has a HUGE advantage over analog, in that there is no noise or distortion added to the signal when adding an effect to the computer's audio output or an additional component to the signal chain such as a digital signal processor or A/V receiver. Any noises the effect or unit itself makes will of course be present.  The higher you like your volume, the more you should appreciate a digital signal chain and higher signal to noise ratios!  This is also why today's concerts sound better than they ever did with analog gear.  I will spare you the details on the induction of noise into the signal over long analog cable runs because it is not relevant to this discussion.  Who am I?  I am an audio/video design and operation professional with over 35 years of experience in both analog and digital audio, home theater, video and lighting systems for homes, venues, clubs, churches, courthouses, theaters, etc...(and I am available for hire.  Message me.)  

Beware that you do not confuse noisy source material for a noisy system!  Most all audio technicians have a favorite recording of a favorite song or three that they like to use to tune the sound of live performance audio systems or newly-installed sound systems.  For me there are a few of them:  Seal - "Alive" off of his second CD, Michael McDonald's version of "I Heard It Through The Grapevine" from 'Motown' and Tracy Chapman's "Fast Car", which can be used to truly test any system's capabilities!  There are others that are all part of a special audio setup collection I use, but those are the current biggest faves.  If you're listening to something recorded prior to the year 2000, the low-end frequency response/management is likely to be spotty, at best.   What I mean by that is that when I am listening to some 1920's or 1930's big band, or the original recording of Vince Guaraldi's 'Charlie Brown Christmas' album on YouTube Music during the holidays (as a specific example), my sub starts rumbling and being a noisy nuisance instead of being musical because while analog microphones and recording equipment have been capable of recording very deep bass sounds down to 20Hz and below since about the 1930's, the ability to faithfully reproduce those sounds in an audio system has not always been present in those same recording studios, so you end up hearing the air conditioning/fan blowing across a microphone, or the stomping of feet on the same wooden floor the mic stand is on.  These are just noisy original recordings by their nature and are a case study in the application of a high-pass fiter in order to get rid of the wind noise/rumble.

In order to keep the volume consistent between various audio sources, there are a number of effective solutions available now that can greatly enhance the listening experience. What we're talking about here is real-time audio processing of the computer's audio output! There are some very good choices available to the Linux HTPC'er, each with its own strengths and weaknesses and I will try to address a few of those in due course here, but know that what may be better for me in my use-case may not be what is best for you in yours. That is just fine and there is nothing wrong with that! There is very little chance of you doing any real harm to anything other than your speakers themselves by trying any or all of the listed options I am outlining below in order to see what works best for you. As a word of caution, always remember to start your tests at an appropriately low amplifier output volume and work your way louder as you desire, bearing in mind the practical capabilities of your system and speakers to do what your are asking of them.  If you hear the bass intruding or affecting the vocals, or worse, if strong bass notes cause a 'flap' type of sound in your wooofer, this is the sound of the speaker being asked to do things it cannot do and you should immediately reduce the volume until the bass no longer affects the vocals or the woofers no longer 'flap'! NEVER turn the amplifier powering your speakers all the way up unless you are absolutely, positively, 100% certain of what you are doing and can afford to replace any or all of the speakers if you blow them up!  I am only presenting what I consider to be the best options for improving Linux-based HTPC audio output performance as of the time of this writing, and share my own experiences in trying them out for myself. Hopefully, this will help you to avoid having to deal with the issues that I've had to overcome in order to achieve a high degree of satisfaction with the audio output of my Linux HTPC computer.  

The intended scope of this text is limited to the improvement of the audio output from media players, web browsers and games while playing music or watching tv/videos, whether you're online or offline. For the purpose of this text, we are not concerning ourselves with microphones (aka: locally-produced audio inputs), though most if not all of the options and plugins listed can be used to process those incoming signals as well. In the case of audio effect plugins, they can be used by other audio software packages to render their effects on existing audio files during production.  To that end, the world would be a much better place if everyone involved with making videos would read this and think more about the audio they include as part of their vlogs, videos and podcasts.  If you aren't recording in a proper studio, and/or there is a fan, A/C or heater running, then it will make lots of low frequency noise in the mic if the 'breeze' blows on it.  As for listening to whatever, I run my system in Stereo, not surround (5.1) mode, even though I am running a 5.1 surround-style speaker setup with large left & right speakers (Klipsch RF-83's), a small center channel (RC-42) and surrounds (RB-41's) together with an R-100SW 10" subwoofer receiving everything below 84Hz from my Yamaha RX-A840BL A/V receiver. It all just sounds better with everything playing in stereo, and besides that, my music (36,000+ songs) is all recorded in stereo, most streaming TV is in stereo and most-importantly, there are no free surround-capable effects that do what the stereo effects such as LUveler can do, despite a few years of searching. Frankly, I do not miss surround sound, as I run my A/V receiver in "7 Channel Stereo" mode anyway. Okay, enough of that, on to the various options for the improvement of audio ouyput on a Linux system!  

# Linux Real-time audio processing solutions:
**[EasyEffects](https://github.com/wwmm/easyeffects)** - Just as the name implies, this is likely the easiest way to improve your computer's audio if your system uses the Pipewire audio subsystem, which it probably does unless you're running a fossilized version of Linux.  This software took over from PulseEffects, which was for the old PulseAudio audio subsystem.  Pipewire is the successor to Pulse and is much better.  You can download EasyEffects presets for various tasks and it has an AutoGain plugin that works well to correct widely varying volumes. I used this software for more than a year, and created a number of presets for it which are available for download here on my GitHub page. Scroll down for more info on those.  I STRONGLY RECOMMEND EasyEffects as a fantastic starting point for anyone who is not experienced in audio production and/or Linux and audio in general. It's easy to install and use.  There is ample help documentation and EasyEffects is available in a number of packaging formats for use on virtually any desktop environment/distro.  It is also widely available in all of the standard distro repositories, though they are often somewhat behind on the updates as compared to the source and/or the universal packaging formats.  It really is a great software package that benefits from very active development and frequent updates!

**[JamesDSP](https://github.com/Audio4Linux/JDSP4Linux)** - This audio processing suite has an interface that is somewhat more simplified than EasyEffects, and does pretty much the same things, though I did not find the volume leveling nearly effective enough, and the interface is not to my personal liking, but that is a personal thing particular to me and not in any way a knock against the software, as it does what it is supposed to do very well and is a great alternative to EasyEffects.  

**Calf Plugins (in Standalone Mode) + qpwgraph** - [Calf](http://calf-studio-gear.org/),  [qpwgraph](https://github.com/rncbc/qpwgraph) - Qpwgraph is a must-have for routing the audio in pipewire/Linux for this setup. It makes everything simpler and persistent across a reboot. Unfortunately, the Calf plugin pack does not feature an autogain type of plugin, so I used the Multiband Limiter to achieve the same effect, but this approach came with certain limitations, such as still having to go into the limiter and adjust input gains for sources that differed significantly in their recorded levels in order to achieve adequate output volume without suffering a degeneration in the mix or the quality of the audio. Making this work used a lot of the knowledge gained from over 30 years of live audio production experience and I would not recommend it for this specific purpose for anyone except those really wishing to learn about how compression and gain structures really work in the digital realm. It is pretty heady audio tech stuff, frankly, and is very much more 'involved' to get right than the average person who is not an audio or tech nerd is going to be willing to deal with. Put simply, for this application, it was far more work than it was worth.  Running the Calf plugin pack independently lets you set presets per-effect, but uses a little more CPU comparatively, and limits the effects available to just those in the Calf Plugin Pack. Not a bad solution, just not ideal for HTPC audio processing purposes, which demand a more hands-free and effective approach.  **NOTE:  Calf plugins do not work under Wayland/Plasma 6/Kubuntu 26.04 LTS!**

**Carla + Calf (plugins) + LUveler Plugin + qpwgraph** - [Carla](https://kx.studio/Applications:Carla),  [LUveler](https://luveler.blogspot.com/), [Calf](http://calf-studio-gear.org/) [qpwgraph](https://github.com/rncbc/qpwgraph) - This has become an ideal full-time audio subsystem configuration for real-time audio processing on Linux, and the one I would most-recommend if you want something a bit more powerful and flexible than EasyEffects or JamesDSP, while still being relatibelay easy to set up and manage.  **NOTE:  Calf plugins do not work under Wayland/Plasma 6/Kubuntu 26.04 LTS!**

Running the Calf plugins from within Carla instead of running them directly in standalone mode lowers their overall CPU usage (versus the qpwgraph & Calf plugins in standalone mode as previously-outlined) and provides the potential for using more and different effects, putting them all in one place for MUCH easier understanding, audio routing and processing efficiency. Carla also gives one the ability to load most any plugin format one could want to run, be it VST, LADSPA, LV2...  

**Under a wayland session, Calf plugins are not an option, so alternatives must be used.  In my case, I am using the Linux Studio Plugins 8-band Parametric EQ into Luveler, as I have not found a suitable replacement for the Calf Bass Enhancer plugin yet.**

LUveler is a fantastic Stereo volume leveler plugin that does exactly as the name implies. When properly configured, you can send audio into the plugin at widely varying volumes and it will all come out at very close to the same perceived volume, and it does it without distorting the audio, affecting the sound quality, nor does it affect the bass/mid/treble ratios of the mix!  Incredible! It does not have a fancy interface or anything, you simply edit the settings from the Effects Rack in Carla, which is the host for the LUveler plugin (and any others you wish to use). I cannot recommend LUveler strongly-enough! It is damn near like having a sound tech in plugin form and is the main plugin that I would run even if I were running no others! Wild changes in volume from video to video and source to source are a thing of the past when using this plugin! Installing LUveler on Linux is as simple as downloading the archive and extracting it to the .ladspa directory inside your home directory. Verify that Carla's plugins location settings are looking there in Carla's settings, refresh the plugin cache in the plugin list, then you can add the plugin into Carla's rack, being sure it's the last plugin in the signal chain. Patch Carla into the signal path in qpwgraph's Patchbay between the audio source and the audio output of your PC (it usually does this itself automatically), click save in Carla and qpwgraph so your settings will be saved and persistent across reboots.

I have previously added a filter, an EQ and a Bass Enhancer to Carla's rack of effects for my use case. I used to use the Calf Filter plugin in HighPass mode in order to remove the bass from the audio, and it works very well to remove the wind noise/rumble from train/aviation/outdoor videos. I would simply bypass it when it was not needed (right click on the effect in the Carla rack, then click bypass).  

**Calf Filter settings:**
- Input and Output Gains - 0 db
- Resonance - -3 db
- Frequency - 142 Hz
- Slope - 36 db/octave
- Inertia - 11 ms

# Wayland Session Notes:
I am no longer running the Calf Filter, or any of the Calf plugins, as they have not been updated to work on Plasma 6/Kubuntu 26.04 under wayland and as such do not run due to unmet dependencies.  I hope someone takes up development of them so I can start using their awesome bass enhancer again.  I have migrated Carla to running as a daemon with a Jack session instead of Pulseaudio with pw-jack which eliminated some latency, stability and quantum concerns I was experiencing.  This has also allowed me to stop running qpwgraph to manage connections by using pipewire and wireplumber rules to automate the process of connecting all new audio sources to the new dummy sink and into Carla from there.

I used to use the Calf 8-band parametric EQ plugin to customize the audio to be more pleasing to my older ears amd to provide the high-pass functionality formerly provided by the dedicated filter. I also used to use the Calf Bass Enhancer plugin to deepen the bass in my music when jamming. This effect reminds me of the Peavey Kosmos (& Kosmos Pro) or BBE's Bass/Sonic Enhancer effects that were used on analog PA systems to make that bass you 'feel' more than 'hear', which I am a big fan of. :)  

There are multiple ways to run Carla and the associated plugins (see Carla>Configure Carla>Engine). I now prefer to use it in "Patchbay" mode for simplicity's sake. This means that the audio flows through the rack in whatever way you arrange the 'wiring' between your effects in the patchbay but Carla itself appears as a single unit to qpwgraph.  Routing the audio properly is very important for optimal functionality. I strongly recommend organizing your plugins/effects as follows:
1. Filter (if used)
2. ... All effects other than LUveler (...such as a Gate, Bass Enhancer and/or Exciter)...
3. EQ
4. LUveler (The plugin that makes life wonderful!)

An EQ, whether traditional banded-style or parametric, should primarily be used for lowering the levels of frequencies that are 'out of balance to the loud side' or 'unpleasant to your ears' in your particular speaker setup.  Try cutting some of the upper bass around 140-200 Hz to clean up a muddy sound and/or a dip around 500-1000 Hz to correct a 'honky" sound.  Try to refrain from ever adding gain/volume, either overall or at individual frequencies with the EQ, as that can cause distortion and speaker damage in extreme circumstances.

If you run Carla in Continuous Rack Mode, then your Carla Rack should always have the LUveler plugin at the bottom of the effects list as the last stop for audio before leaving the computer. Once properly configured, you will enjoy steady volumes across all media sources without any required effort at all!  

**LUveler settings:**
- Target Level - -10.0 LUFS
- True Peak - 0.0 dBTP
- Max Gain - 30.0 db
- Freeze Level - -36 LUFS
- Input Level - -0.0 LUFS
- Correction High - 100.0%
- Correction Low - 100.0%
- Corr Mix Mode - 3  

I moved Carla to my Virtual Desktop 4. I leave it minimized there and hardly think about it except for when I want to either engage or disengage the filter.

Any time you start a game or application for the first time using this audio processing setup, and you find there is no audio output, or the audio seems excessively low in volume, don't panic!  Alt-Tab (task switch) over to qpwgraph & Carla, patch the audio source to Carla's inputs in qpwgraph, click save in both qpwgraph and Carla, then Alt-Tab back to your game or app and enjoy MUCH steadier audio levels, processed to your liking! Do not forget to save your settings in Carla as well as qpwgraph each time you patch a new audio player or source/program into Carla's inputs so that they will also automatically reconnect the source back to its proper inputs the next time!   This will also have the knock-on effect of making the transition to a setup that does not require qpwgraph seamless once I can figure out how and why Carla stopped managing the connections itself after a reboot.  With my rack and audio routing saved in Carla, I have also set an autorun entry in my startup folder to load Carla with my preferred initial settings after each reboot. By doing those things, the connecting and processing of the various audio sources I listen to has now become almost completely automatic and invisible, and I no longer frequently reach for the A/V receiver's remote to adjust the volume!  

I am still using qpwgraph to maintain the persistence of the connections across reboots/sessions until I can figure out why Carla stopped doing it for me after a reboot (as previously stated).  Once I figure this issue out, then that information on how to make that happen reliably will replace this paragraph and other logical edits will also be made, so watch this space for possible future developments!  

**June 2026 Update!**
Now that I am runing Carla uder a Wayland JACK session using pw-jack, I have set up rules and a dummy sink in pipewire/wireplumber for all audio sources to auto-connect to that then routes the audio into Carla and on to the output(s), eliminating the need for qpwgraph entirely!

# EasyEffects_Presets
BayouGuru's EasyEffects Presets!

This repository mirrors the contents of BayouGuru's "/.var/app/com.github.wwmm.easyeffects/config/easyeffects/output" directory 
where EasyEffects stores its output presets data. BayouGuru makes no warranty as to how well these presets may or may not work on your system.  As a matter of fact, they may damage your system if used improperly!

BayouGuru is no longer using EasyEffects.  These presets are designed to run on a large Klipsch Surround Sound System via a Yamaha
RX-A840 A/V Receiver.  The system has been set using YPAO for Natural sound. They should sound decent-enough on any system that is sufficiently capable of full-range frequency reproduction, i.e.:  a system with a subwoofer and/or large speakers.  Additionally, I use the A/V Receiver's remote to control the volume in the house, so the computer is always outputting 100% volume to the Yamaha A/V Receiver via the HDMI connection.

These presets were NOT DESIGNED FOR USE ON LAPTOPS OR SMALL SPEAKERS!  Having said that, the presets that filter out the bass should work quite well on laptops.  Those presets would be the "125HP...", "TrainCams" and "Vocal Clarifier" presets, which BayouGuru designed for their named purposes. Any and all presets that use the "BE" (Bass Enhancer) can blow up your speakers if they are not designed to handle a lot of very low frequencies! How to tell if you should or should not use them? Simple! If
your audio system is capable of producing bass you can "feel" from across the room, then you can probably use the presets with the Bass Enhancer without too much worry as long as you pay attention to your volume, being on the listen for any distortion of the bass, which, if heard, means you need to turn it down a bit before you damage your system!

# Preset List/Descriptions:

The "125HP+AG+C+Max" preset was designed for nighttime/unobtrusive TV watching, as it filters out the bass that tends to rumble through the house.  The effects used are:  a 125Hz High-Pass Filter (removes bass frequencies from 125Hz downward) -> AutoGain (maintains a minimum level) -> Compressor (keeps varying levels under control) -> Maximizer (boosts the overall volume like normalizing does for mp3's, but in near real time and, ideally, not to the point of clipping)

"AG+BE+Cry+M" is a music preset for music that could use some help on the bottom andtop end by using a Bass Enhancer and the Crystallizer to enhance the bass and high frequencies respectively, with the Maximizer being used both as a compressor and as a maximizer.  I do tend to tweak the settings of this preset a lot, the specifics depending on the source music.

"AG+C+Max" is my main preset!  I use it almost all the time for everything.  It's an AutoGain effect feeding into a Compressor, then into the Maximizer.  This does a very good job of reducing the widely varying volume levels of YouTube Videos, Live TV, and many other different streaming services as well as the sound from a local record player and an mp3 collection.  

"AG+Comp+Cry+BE+Max" is another music preset, adding additional Compression to the "AG+BE..." preset above.  Rarely used as it is still a bit of a work in progress.

"BE+Cr+Max" is yet another music preset, this one is specifically designed for use with sources that do not have volume issues, such as the output of certain music players which normalize their output, like VLC, SM Player & Audacious, for example. It adds "depth" and "sparkle" for that "live concert" kind of sound.

"C+Cry+BE+Max" is a music preset for non-normalizing players and/or more dynamic music content that is more in need of level/volume correction.

"Max" is simply a Maximizer to boost overall volumes.

"Monauralized and Maximized" is useful for podcasts that put their audio to one side or the other, whether on purpose or by accident.  It sums both channels to the middle and maximizes the volume.  This is designed primarily for spoken word 
applications like podcasts, historical videos or audiobooks.

"TrainCams" is a unique preset for listening to live webcams of trains/train yards, a.k. "Virtual Trainspotting". It removes both the high and low frequencies so the brake squeal is not so loud and it is easier to hear the engines and other things.

"Vocal Clarifier" was designed for a specific situation where the bacground music and noise was drowning out the voices, so this was designed to help with that.

## Installation

The easiest way to install these presets is to download them to your preferred download directory, then use EasyEffects' "Import Preset" function to import them.

Alternatively....

You could Download and save these presets to  "/.var/app/com.github.wwmm.easyeffects/config/easyeffects/output" on your system (if using the EasyEffects Flatpack). 

If you are using a non-flatpack version of EasyEffects on Linux, presets are likely stored in "~/.config/easyeffects/output".  

Once you have copied the new presets to the appropriate directory, close and restart EasyEffects, then the new presets should be listed in your available output presets.  

Enjoy!
